 
   
 Fact Sheet 
August 2009 
Environmental Hazards 
Weigh Heavy on the Heart 
Information for Older Adults and 
Their Caregivers 
Environmental  
hazards can  
contribute 
 
to heart 
disease and stroke. 
Older adults should 
minimize exposure  
to environmental  
hazards 
 
such as  
air pollution, 
arsenic, lead, and  
excessive heat. 
D
id you know that environmen­
tal hazards can contribute to 
heart disease and stroke? This 
fact sheet summarizes envi­
ronmental factors and how they can 
affect the health of older adults. It also 
suggests how older adults can minimize 
their exposure to air and water pollut­
ants that contribute to heart disease and 
stroke or worsen their symptoms. 
Heart disease, the leading cause of 
death in the United States, and stroke, 
the third most frequent cause of death, 
cost the nation hundreds of billions of 
dollars each year. According to the CDC, 
in 2005, heart disease killed 652,091 
people, which represented 27.1% of all 
deaths in the U.S.1 
Environmental Factors Contribute 
to Heart Disease and Stroke 
Indoor Air Pollution 
People who spend long periods of time 
indoors are often the most susceptible 
to the effects of indoor air pollution. 
Studies suggest that older adults 
spend up to 90% of their time indoors. 
Indoor air is comprised of a mixture 
of contaminants penetrating from the 
outdoors and those generated indoors. 
Indoor air can contain secondhand 
smoke, fumes from household cleaning 
products, and even carbon monoxide. 
These indoor contaminants can be 
dangerously toxic, especially to those at 
risk of stroke and heart disease. 
Smoke: Secondhand smoke is one of 
the worst indoor air pollutants. Smoking 
is known to contribute to heart disease 
and stroke, but inhaling the same dose 
of secondhand smoke and smoke from 
active smoking is equally detrimental. 
Wood burning stoves and fireplaces can 
generate smoke containing fine carbon 
particles. These particles may trigger 
chest pain and palpitations, shortness of 
breath, and fatigue, especially in older 
adults with heart disease.2 
Household Products: When used 
improperly, some household products 
can be very dangerous for people with 
heart conditions. Vapors from cleaning 
products, paint solvents, and pesticides 
require proper ventilation and limited 
exposure to minimize detrimental 
effects. 
Fumes from paint solvents, such as 
mineral spirits, turpentine, methanol, 
and xylene, stress the lungs and heart, 
contributing to irregular heartbeat. 
Although lead-based paints are now 
banned, many homes built before 
1978 used lead-containing paints. 
Take appropriate precautions during 
renovations to minimize paint chips or 
dust generated that pose serious health 
hazards, including high blood pressure. 
Pesticide poisonings often result 
from exposure to toxic fumigants or 
insecticides. Symptoms of this type of 
poisoning include arrhythmia or a very 
slow pulse.3 In severe cases, exposure 
can contribute to a heart attack or even 
death. 
Carbon Monoxide: Carbon monoxide 
(CO), an invisible and odorless gas, 
is a dangerous pollutant because it 
is difficult to detect. It is particularly 
 

 
 
harmful to people with heart disease, clogged 
arteries, or congestive heart failure because it 
significantly limits the blood’s ability to carry 
oxygen. For a person with heart disease, exposure 
to even low levels of CO may cause chest pain, 
increased heart rhythm irregularities and make 
it difficult to exercise.4 Sources of CO include 
fumes from furnaces, gas water heaters, ranges, 
dryers, space heaters, fireplaces, wood stoves, and 
exhaust from cars idling in enclosed garages. 
Outdoor Air Pollution 
Older adults who are at risk for heart disease and 
stroke may benefit from lowering their contact 
with air polluted with particulates and vehicular 
exhaust. 
Particle Pollution: Small soot particles found 
in outdoor air can be hazardous and the risk 
is greatest among people with heart disease, 
chronic obstructive lung disease and asthma. 
Particles originate from a variety of sources 
including vehicles, power plants, industrial 
smokestacks, and fires. Some particles are 
emitted into the air directly, but others form as 
a result of complicated chemical reactions in 
the atmosphere. Particles can travel hundreds to 
thousands of miles downwind, affecting people 
far from the sources. 
Traffic: Time spent in traffic has also been 
associated with the onset of a heart attack.5 It is 
not known whether this is due to traffic-related 
air pollution (e.g., particle pollution, CO), the 
stress of being caught in traffic, or some other risk 
factor. 
Pollutant Gases: Ozone, sulfur dioxide, and 
nitrogen dioxide are also important components 
of air pollution and are associated with adverse 
health effects. Ozone is a strong irritant to the 
lungs and airways and can cause chest pain that 
can be mistaken for a heart attack. 
Drinking Water 
There is evidence that several metals found in 
drinking water may contribute to heart disease or 
aggravate its symptoms. 
Lead: Exposure to lead can increase blood 
pressure. While people are primarily exposed 
to lead through paint dust, drinking water is 
another source of lead exposure. While water 
from a community’s public water supply must 
meet EPA standards for lead, tap water may still 
contain lead exceeding the allowable levels due 
to the presence of older lead-containing plumbing 
materials. 
Arsenic: Long-term exposure to high levels of 
arsenic, a natural element found in drinking 
water in some areas of the country, can harm 
the heart. EPA has a drinking water standard 
for public drinking water systems to ensure that 
people are not exposed to high levels of arsenic. 
If you obtain your water from a private well or 
small water system, see the “Steps You Can Take” 
section for more information about actions to 
limit your exposure. 
Excessive Heat Events 
Heat events are described as prolonged periods 
when temperatures reach at least 10º F. (5.5ºC.) 
above a region’s average high temperature. Heat 
stroke is the most serious of a range of health 
effects associated with excessive heat exposure. 
It occurs when the body’s temperature control 
system fails causing a rapid rise in core body 
temperature. Heat stroke is characterized by hot, 
dry, and red skin, and a lack of perspiration. Other 
warning signs are confusion and hallucinations. 
Heat stroke is a serious condition requiring 
immediate medical attention (call 911 or take the 
person to an emergency room). Left untreated, 
heat stroke can cause severe and permanent 
damage to vital organs, permanent disability, or 
death. 
Persons with heart disease and stroke have 
impaired cooling mechanisms and are more 
vulnerable during heat events. The use of 
some medications can make individuals more 
susceptible to heat events for example, anti­
depressants and some circulatory medications. 
During heat events, air-conditioning is the best 
protection against heat-related illness and death. 
Even a few hours a day in air-conditioning can 
greatly reduce the risk. Research indicates electric 
fans are only effective if the ambient temperature 
is lower than the body temperature. Electric fans 
may provide comfort, but when temperatures are 
in the high 90s, fans do not prevent heat-related 
illness and could actually be harmful. 
Encourage Your Local Government to 
Take Action 
Local governments should take these simple 
steps to reduce hazards and publicize precautions 
older adults can take. 
•  Promote smoke-free policies in public 
places: By keeping public places (restaurants, 
bars, and parks) smoke-free, communities can 
limit exposure to secondhand smoke. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Steps You Can Take to 
Help Control Heart Disease  
and Stroke 
A healthy lifestyle is the best way to prevent 
heart disease and stroke. In addition, 
older adults should limit their contact with 
environmental risk factors and encourage 
local governments to take action to reduce 
environmental hazards. 
Limit Contact With Environmental Factors 
•  Keep smoke out of indoor spaces: Avoid 
smoke from tobacco. Encourage smokers to 
smoke outdoors. Avoid restaurants, bars, and 
other public places where people smoke. Do 
not use, or limit use of, wood-burning stoves 
and fireplaces. 
•  Use caution when working around the 
house: Improve ventilation when painting by 
scheduling indoor painting for times when 
windows can be left open and by using fans. 
Take frequent fresh air breaks when painting; 
avoid painted rooms for several days. 
Before renovating a home built before 
1978, take precautions to avoid lead paint 
exposure. Do not use a belt-sander, propane 
torch, heat gun, dry scraper, or dry sandpaper 
to remove lead-based paint because these 
actions generate unacceptable amounts of 
lead dust and fumes. 
If you must use pesticides, always read 
labels first and follow all precautions and 
restrictions. When handling pesticides, 
take protective measures; follow directions 
and wear impermeable gloves, long pants, 
and long-sleeved shirts. Change clothes 
and wash your hands immediately after 
applying pesticides. Wash clothes exposed to 
pesticides separately. 
•   
Avoid carbon monoxide poisoning: Never 
leave a car running in a garage, even with 
the garage door open. Keep gas appliances 
properly adjusted. Install and use exhaust 
fans. Have a trained professional inspect, 
clean, and tune-up your central heating 
system (furnaces, flues, and chimneys) 
every fall. Install carbon monoxide detectors 
throughout your home. 
•  Reduce exposure to traffic and outdoor 
air pollution: Pay attention to Air Quality 
Index (AQI) forecasts to know when the 
air is unhealthy for sensitive groups. Check 
with your physician about lowering your 
activity level when the AQI is high. Put air 
conditioning on the re-circulate mode and 
keep windows closed during smoke events 
from fires in buildings or forests. Reduce your 
time in traffic. Avoid physical activity and limit 
exercise near busy roads. 
•  Prevent heat stress: Use your air-conditioner 
or go to air-conditioned buildings in your 
community. Take a cool shower or bath. Wear 
lightweight, light-colored, and loose-fitting 
clothing. Ask your doctor if your medications 
increase your susceptibility to heat-related 
illness. 
Drink lots of fluids, but avoid beverages 
containing caffeine, alcohol, or large amounts 
of sugar. These drinks cause dehydration. If a 
doctor limits your fluid intake, be sure to ask 
how much to drink when it’s hot. 
•   
Drink clean water: To limit your exposure to 
lead through your water, run cold water for at 
least 30 seconds, preferably 2 to 3 minutes 
before drinking. Testing for lead also may be 
advisable for people who get their water from 
municipal sources and live in older homes 
with lead service lines. If you receive your 
water from a municipal system, you should 
first request information from your municipal 
system for results of federally mandated 
testing for lead and copper, particularly in 
homes from the area where you live. 
EPA’s arsenic standard exempts small water 
systems that annually provide fewer than 15 
“hook-ups” or serve fewer than 25 people. If 
your water supply is from a private well or a 
small system that is exempted from testing 
and you live in an area where high levels of 
arsenic have been reported in the ground 
water, you may want to have your water 
tested for arsenic. 
The best source of specific information about 
your drinking water is your water supplier. 
Water suppliers that serve the same people 
year-round are required to send their custom­
ers an annual water quality report (some­
times called a consumer confidence report). 
Contact your water supplier to get a copy. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Promote Active Heat Health Watch/Warning 
Systems: These systems can help identify 
when a heat-related threat is likely, alert 
residents, and provide assistance to at-risk 
individuals. 
•  Ensure that Air Quality Index forecasts are 
publicized and followed: EPA’s Air Quality 
Index is an index for reporting daily air quality. 
See www.epa.gov/airnow. 
•  Promote public transit options that reduce 
traffic and air pollution: Public transit is 
the best way to alleviate road congestion, air 
pollution, and stress. 
•  Locate parks, bike paths, and trails away 
from major roads: Physical activity is one 
of the best ways to lower your risk for heart 
disease and stroke. Exercise away from roads 
and traffic pollution. 
Control Your Major Risk Factors for Heart 
Disease and Stroke 
The environment is just one factor that influences 
a person’s susceptibility to heart disease and 
stroke. The most important steps you can take to 
reduce risk factors for heart disease and stroke 
include: 
•  Avoid smoke from tobacco 
•   
Schedule time for regular physical activity 30  
minutes per day at least 5 days a week 
•   
Follow the 2005 Dietary Guidelines for  
Americans 
•   
See your health care provider regularly to  
screen for and treat high blood pressure, 
diabetes, and hyperlipidemia (elevated levels 
of lipids in the bloodstream) 
Resources 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Air Quality Index: http://airnow.gov/ 
Indoor Air Quality: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/ 
Lead: http://www.epa.gov/lead/ 
Painting: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/homes/ 
hip-painting.html 
Pesticides: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/ 
Smoke Free Homes and Cars: http://www.epa. 
gov/smokefree/ 
Health and Human Services 
Dietary Guidelines: http://www.health.gov/ 
DietaryGuidelines/ 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Heart Disease: http://www.cdc.gov/HeartDisease/ 
Physical Fitness Guidelines: 
http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/ 
guidelines/olderadults.html 
Federal Emergency Management  
Administration: 
Extreme Heat: http://www.fema.gov/hazard/heat/ 
index.shtm 
National Weather Service 
http://www.nws.noaa.gov/om/brochures/heat_ 
wave.shtml 
American Heart Association 
http://www.americanheart.org/ 
Health Effects Institute 
http://www.healtheffects.org/about.htm 
Learn More 
The EPA Aging Initiative works to protect the 
health of older adults through the coordination 
of research, prevention strategies, and public 
education on environmental factors. For more 
information, or to join the EPA Aging Initiative 
listserv, visit: www.epa.gov/aging. 
Endnotes 
1 Kung HC, Hoyert DL, Xu J, Murphy SL. Deaths: final data for 
2005. National Vital Statistics Reports. 2008;56(10). 
2 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Air Quality Guide for 
Particle Pollution. http://www.epa.gov/airnow//aqi_cl.pdf 
3 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Regulation and 
Management of Pesticide Poisonings. 1999. http://www.epa. 
gov/pesticides/safety/healthcare/handbook/Index1.pdf 
4 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Air Quality Criteria for 
Carbon Monoxide, EPA 600-P-99-001F. Research Triangle Park, 
NC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office Research and 
Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment. 
June 2000. 
5 Peters, A., S. von Klot, M. Heier, I. Trentinaglia, H. Ines, A. 
Hormann, H.E. Erich, H. Lowel. “Exposure to Traffic and the Onset 
of Myocardial Infarction.” The New England Journal of Medicine. 
Oct 21, 2004. 351 (17): 1721-30. 
Publication Number EPA 100-F-09-043 
